# Addressing Rules

[Chapter 6.40](https://www.grantspassoregon.gov/DocumentCenter/View/39/Title-6---Grants-Pass-Uniform-Traffic-Code--PDF?bidId=) of the City of Grants Pass [Municipal Code](https://www.grantspassoregon.gov/316/Municipal-Code) specifies rules of address numbering.  Please review this chapter prior to assigning new addresses to the city.  Although the section below summarizes the rules as they exist currently, the City Council may update and revise the municipal code over time.  If there is any conflict between the guidelines contained here and the current city code, please observe the municipal code and update this documentation to be consistent with current policy.

## Cardinal Prefixes

Municipal code 6.40.030(B) requires the addition of cardinal prefixes to new city streets.  When a subdivision includes a new street, developers submit a proposed name for the street listed on the site plan.  As part of the addressing process, the GIS office creates a line file in the Proposed Streets layer representing the proposed new street and assigning the street a name.  The public safety team then reviews the name to ensure it is unique within the city and does not conflict with any prior street names.  If the proposed name does not include a cardinal prefix, then assign the correct prefix to the proposed name prior to addressing the subdivision.  The Southern Pacific Railroad tracks serve as the divider between north and south designations, and the center line of 6th Street and Orchard Avenue serves as the divider between West and East designations.  All new streets should receive either NE, NW, SE or SW as a prefix depending on their location relative to these dividers.

If the developers are proposing an extension of an existing road, then the prefix should match the current designation of the road.  County roads adopted into the city may not have a directional prefix, as well as city streets adopted prior to the referenced language in the municipal code.  Once a street begins serving addresses, city staff are reluctant to change the name of the road by adding a directional prefix, as this would change the existing addresses of current residents.

## Even and Odd Numbers

Municipal code 6.40.020(A) specifies the use of even numbers on the north and west sides of the street, and the use of odd numbers on the south and east sides of the street.  Some pre-existing addresses in the city do not adhere to these guidelines, so be cautious using surrounding addresses to orient yourself if you are directionally challenged.  If the street runs generally north to south, assign even address numbers to addresses on the west side, and odd numbers to addresses on the east side.  If the street runs generally from east to west, assign even addresses to the north side and odd addresses to the south side.  For roads that turn 90 degrees or more, such as a loop, change the numbering scheme to reflect the change in orientation at the sharpest point in the turn.

## Block Numbering

Numbering should increase by one hundred every city block. Numbers should increase in increment heading away from the city center, as set by the divider streets that define the cardinal prefixes.  So if the location is west of 6th Street or Orchard Avenue, then the street numbers should be increasing as they proceed west, whereas east of 6th Street or Orchard Avenue, street numbers should be increasing as they proceed east.  Likewise, street numbers north of the Southern Pacific Railroad tracks should increase as they proceed north, whereas south of the Southern Pacific Railroad tracks street numbers should increase as they proceed south.  Even if there is an adequate numeric interval in the numbering scheme to accommodate the additional address assignments without advancing to the next hundred block, a new hundred block should begin at each city block, or at each interval sufficient to accommodate a city block, even if no intersection is yet present.  Emergency providers expect street numbering to increase by intervals of one hundred every block extending outward from the city center, and use this progression to help orient themselves as they respond to emergency calls.

## Historic Exceptions

As you become familiar with the addressing rules specified in the municipal code, current existing addresses may catch your attention as being out-of-compliance with these rules.  Some may predate the rule in question, or may even be carelessly assigned by a previous member of staff.  But once assigned, city staff are reluctant to reassign existing addresses unless there is a pressing public safety issue.  When assigning new addresses, be careful to properly orient relative to the city center using the defined divider streets, and do not rely solely upon the context of surrounding addresses to determine the numbering pattern.  New addresses should be consistent with current policy in the municipal code, even if this comes at the expense of consistency with historic exceptions in the surrounding sites.
