# Packages

For common workflow tasks in the GIS office, we use the Python package format to consolidate code into a library of functions.  The following chapters describe the purpose of each package and how to use the functions in these libraries to perform the various duties of the office.  Packages for the GIS office reside in the [Grants Pass code repository](https://github.com/grantspassoregon) at github.com.

Github provides a free version control management system for organizing code collaboration and use.  Version control tracks the change record, so users can easily revert a change if they have altered or deleted something and need to undo it.  Code tracking also allows users to inspect the changes between versions, focusing on what has been added, altered or deleted.  Since its creation in 2008, github has become the *de facto* standard of version control, and is the largest open source code repository in use, providing a safe and stable online backup for our work.  

Perhaps most importantly, version control management enables collaborative development, both through an integrated change record, and through branched versioning.  Users can explore changes to code in development branches with confidence that their changes will not impact the production branch, and multiple contributors can work on a shared code base, using standardized tools to detect and resolve any merge conflicts.  The github platform provides both a command-line and GUI interface for updating and maintaining code, as well as automated actions for publishing content to the web, such as this markdown book.
